## Meeting
12/8/2017

### In attendance
Julie Gronlund
Jeremy
Jordan
Julianne
Tim
Abigail
David

Brad has news: rolls through it..  
Announcements: There's a slack channel!  
Julie Gronlund visits from IHGC  
Brad to send out Slack invites  

AI? -- look at 
Machine Learning... supervised learning. In CS: Dmitri  
A novel: Policemen's Beard is Half Constructed

A main index page that links to a bunch of sonnet pieces/games.
Lauren to design

Jeremy has a javascript page almost ready to go...

Jeremy.  
Algorithms professor and Jeremy looking to piecify  
Brute force with "dancing links" -- will cover the board in pieces.  
Generate puzzles that aren't necessarily in sonnet grid

We should make a design doc that is capable of organizing thoughts and illustrating them.   
What we need, people, methods, funding, to pitch  
People will volunteer  
First week of Feb or last week of January (after 26th).  

An educational game, a game engine (Unity), 

Poetry tetris...  
pieces come up from the bottom.  
[We spent some time thinking about this, trying it on the whiteboard]

Guide it to a slot but can still shuffle  
A progression of things filling up the screen  
A la Space Invaders: pieces coming down, build line by line.

Turning the Tetris pieces...  
FAB RIC ATE or ATE RIC FAB

Tetris Poetry  
Talk to Mark Florian about Candy Crush.  
Pieces coming up from the bottom.  
You place in the first row, not locked in, so you can shuffle them, 
First line appears first.  
Then second, etc.  
You lose when it fills up the screen  
Leveling up and lose clues context  
Color code lines in easier levels. Shoot a ray across them to check the line.  
Leveling up means more interesting tricks  
Preview box? -- You put a piece in the reserve bank? 

Poem Sweeper  
Julianne to propose?  
Mine Sweeper and Poetic Scansion? (Julianne offers)  
Marking stressed of unstressed  
Bombs when ...  
For Better or Verse as Mine Sweeper...  
Call it "Poem Sweeper"  
10 tells you how many syllables

Poem Crush  
Syllables as individual pieces, switch pieces in the grid, grid has lots of false syllables,  
When you correct correct syllables then they line and then you can move it.  
You can destroy false syllables by double-clicking.

NEXT TERM: Friday standing meetings.  
1:30pm to 2:30pm

Design improvements... 

E-School - 3D printing.  
Need also to look at MEC resources.

Page Barbour

Taylorize puzzle molds?