### First Meeting, 11/16/2017
Meeting with Tim and Lauren to discuss web design. 

There should be a front - this is the group..
We need navigation (on the left

Nav bar:  
blog posts  
projects  
....puzzles - people 
a gallery  
....all the puzzles (captions)  
about  
....mission  
....participants  
publications/press  
....essays  
....talks  
online puzzles (jeremy's stuff)  
for educators  
....lesson plans (for different ages)  
....cut-out a puzzle  
    
Delegation: who does what? 

A Timeline: 2/23 as a first deadline? 

Lauren: it should be scaleable
